[general]
name=Protected Species Check
qgisMinimumVersion=3.22
qgisMaximumVersion=4.99
supportsQt6=True
description=Which species in your layer are legally protected — under which law, and which edition. Canada, England, Wales and Scotland, and the global conventions.
about=Screens the scientific names in any vector layer or table against the conservation registers that decide, and writes the verdict back as attribute columns. 14 laws in force in Canada — the federal Species at Risk Act Schedule 1 and the Migratory Birds Convention Act, Quebec's threatened and vulnerable species regulations for fauna and flora, and the Acts of Ontario, New Brunswick, Manitoba, Alberta, Nova Scotia, British Columbia, Newfoundland and Labrador, Saskatchewan, the Northwest Territories and Yukon — and 8 in the United Kingdom: the schedules of the Wildlife and Countryside Act, the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations for England and Wales, and the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Regulations for Scotland; we hold none for Northern Ireland, and an answer about records there says so — with the CITES and CMS Appendices beside them as conventions, never as another jurisdiction's Act — with the IUCN Red List, COSEWIC and the BC Conservation Data Centre beside them, shown as assessments and never as law. Every answer names the instrument and the edition it cites. Where the layer has coordinates, only the laws in force there are marked as applying; where it has none, the plugin says the jurisdiction was not established rather than implying every register applies. It also flags the species whose COSEWIC assessment is not the status Schedule 1 carries, which is the most common way a report quotes the wrong status. Names are resolved against the GBIF backbone first. Requires an internet connection; the screening runs on the Passage Data service and no account is needed. Every screening states its own coverage: it ends with the registers it was actually checked against, and names the jurisdictions in your file that no register we hold reaches — an absent instrument is never reported as an absent listing.
version=0.1.10
author=Passage Data
email=hello@passage-data.com

tracker=https://github.com/passage-data/qgis-protected-species-check/issues
repository=https://github.com/passage-data/qgis-protected-species-check
homepage=https://passage-data.com/

category=Vector
icon=icon.png
experimental=True
deprecated=False

tags=species,protected species,endangered,threatened,species at risk,conservation status,red list,IUCN,COSEWIC,SARA,biodiversity,ecology,taxonomy,GBIF,Canada,Quebec,environmental assessment,wildlife,United Kingdom,England,Scotland,Wales,Wildlife and Countryside Act,Schedule 5,Habitats Regulations,UK

changelog=0.1.10
    The page that describes this plugin now names the United Kingdom beside Canada: 8
    instruments in force in England, Wales and Scotland, and none held for Northern Ireland.
    Only this page and the version number changed; the screening is the one 0.1.9 runs.
    0.1.9
    ⛔⛔ A PLACE YOU CHOSE WAS CREDITED TO A LAYER THAT HAS NONE. Screening Belfast's
    street-tree register — 37,557 rows and no geometry — with Northern Ireland chosen in the
    place list, the panel said "189 of them carry no usable geometry, so their place comes from
    the rest of the layer". There is no rest of that layer: the place came from the list, and a
    place chosen there answers for every name in the run. 0.1.8 corrected this sentence for a
    layer with NO place chosen and left it standing for the case the United Kingdom entries
    were added for. It now names the place you chose.
    ⛔⛔ ACTS THAT WERE NOT ASKED WERE NOT SAID. Choosing « Canada » answers with the federal
    Acts, and on every provincial listing the service returns the sentence "12 act(s) we hold
    for CA were NOT asked … name the province and they are screened". The panel received it
    and printed it nowhere, so the only trace was a column reading "not established". It is
    printed under the headline now, once. (0.1.8's notes counted eleven provincial and
    territorial Acts; the service holds twelve — Québec has two.)
    Both are barred on the Belfast register itself, each beside a control showing the bar
    cannot pass by printing its sentence always.
    ★ A UNITED KINGDOM LAYER IS NOW PLACED IN ITS NATION FROM ITS COORDINATES. The service could
    place a UK coordinate only in the United Kingdom, so York's tree preservation orders, read from
    the layer's coordinates as this window recommends, came back with all eight UK instruments
    "not asked". It now answers under England's, Wales's or Scotland's own schedules — a great
    crested newt and an otter at York Minster read `yes` — and for Northern Ireland it says we hold
    no register there. That change is in the service, so every version of this plugin gets it; the
    page now names the eight UK instruments beside Canada's fourteen.
    0.1.8
    ⛔⛔ THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH TIMES A LAW, A CONVENTION AND AN ASSESSMENT WERE TOLD APART BY A
    SENTENCE INSTEAD OF BY THE ROWS — and both were LABELS, which is why the census that ended the
    first six could not see them: it reads code, and a heading is not code. `pd_law` was described,
    on this page and in the code, as "the laws in force here that list this taxon". Measured against
    the live service on a file with no coordinates, that cell held TWELVE acts across twelve
    jurisdictions — the federal Act, Québec's, Ontario's, New Brunswick's, Alberta's, Manitoba's,
    Nova Scotia's, Newfoundland's, the Northwest Territories' and three United Kingdom instruments
    — beside `pd_applies: not established`. "In force here" was false for at least eleven of the
    twelve, and the column next to it said so. The panel's second heading, « NAMED, BUT NOT BY A LAW
    IN FORCE HERE », asserted the same thing over Belfast's street-tree register, two lines under the
    service's own sentence saying the place could not be established. Both follow their rows now, and
    the census reads LABELS as well as code — shown catching 0.1.5's heading and 0.1.7's column
    description, planted verbatim, with the count printed both without them and with them.
    ⛔⛔ 189 NAMES WENT UP AND 188 CAME BACK, AND NOTHING SAID SO. Belfast's register holds 189
    distinct values under `SPECIES`; the panel reported all 189 and the service answered about 188,
    with `not_screened: 0`. The 189th is the literal string `N/A`, which the service refuses as a
    name — correctly — but a value that was never in its count could not be in its report either,
    and a reader counting the panel against their own column found a number that does not
    reconcile. The question and the answer are reconciled name by name now, and the difference is
    named. The comparison folds the name the way the wire does, because two of the register's values
    carry a double quote that has to be rewritten before sending: comparing raw layer values reports
    three drops where there is one.
    ⛔ "THEIR PLACE COMES FROM THE LAYER" PROMISED A FALLBACK THAT DOES NOT EXIST. On that same
    file every name carries no usable position AND the layer states no place, so there was no layer
    place for them to come from. ALL of them and SOME of them are different findings, and they had
    one sentence.
    ★★ THE PLACE DROPDOWN IS NO LONGER CANADA-ONLY. The service holds eight United Kingdom
    schedules, and a British table without coordinates had no way to say where it is — so every
    instrument read "not established", which is the one thing that dropdown exists to prevent.
    England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland are offered, on a measurement: England answers
    with the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 Schedule 5, Scotland with the 1994 Regulations'
    Schedule 2, and Northern Ireland with "not covered", naming the country. The United Kingdom
    itself is NOT offered — Schedule 5 does not reach Northern Ireland, so a bare country can only
    be answered "we did not ask", and an entry that guarantees a non-answer is a trap rather than a
    choice. A live bar screens every code the list offers and fails on any the service cannot place.
    ⛔ AND THE « Canada — federal law and the conventions only » ENTRY OVER-CLAIMED. Choosing it
    answers with the federal Acts; the eleven provincial and territorial Acts come back NOT ASKED,
    because the file names the country and no subdivision. That is a limit of the placing, never a
    scope, and the entry says which now.
    ★★ THE UPGRADE PATH IS RUN, which only a first install ever had been. 0.1.5 installed in a
    real QGIS 4.2.2 profile, used, then this version installed over it through QGIS's own
    Install-from-ZIP code in the SAME session and used again: the menu entry survives as exactly one
    leaf, the profile keeps the plugin enabled, the code that answers is the code that was
    installed, and a layer already carrying the six columns is re-screened in place — cells
    replaced, no seventh column, the date moved. It works because QGIS unloads the plugin and drops
    it out of `sys.modules` first, so the whole path rests on `unload` leaving nothing behind. Six
    bars hold it there.
    ★★ SIX PATHS NOBODY HAD RUN, EACH ONE NOW A BAR. A SELECTION on the layer was ignored in
    silence — one feature of four selected, four screened, and a panel saying "4 distinct names
    read from 4 features", true and read by somebody who believes they screened what they picked.
    The screening still covers the whole file, because a name outside the selection is still a
    name you will publish; it says so now. An OPEN EDIT SESSION when the write-back fires does not
    lose uncommitted work, the row whose name is changed but not committed is not written, and a
    rollback does NOT take the six columns back — they go through the provider, so Undo does not
    reach them. A LINE and a MULTIPART feature each give one usable position. A MULTI-LAYER
    GEOPACKAGE takes the columns on the layer you screened and leaves its neighbour alone. And a
    SHAPEFILE WHOSE dBASE IS NOT UTF-8 keeps its accented cells intact through the write-back.
    ⛔⛔ THE CAP HAD NEVER BEEN CROSSED, AND THE SENTENCE IT TURNS ON HAD NEVER BEEN PRINTED. The
    largest layer this suite held has 286 distinct names against a cap of 5,000, so a layer over it
    was ungraded. It now is, and two things were wrong there: the notice said only that the cap was
    reached, which does not tell a person whether one name was dropped or fourteen hundred; and the
    line above it counted what was SENT while saying READ, understating the read by exactly the
    number that went missing. `truncated` is the count now, not a flag — a limit that eats
    information has to hand the caller the number it ate.
    ★ AND THE SUITE NOW RUNS ON A REAL PLACELESS FILE. Every bar about the unplaced path had been
    graded on a two-line CSV the suite writes itself, and a fixture we wrote agrees with us about
    everything. 129 bars, green on QGIS 3.22.9, 3.44.14 and 4.2.2 — and all three of those have now
    been driven as REAL DESKTOPS, with a real window and real fonts, installing this zip through
    QGIS's own Install-from-ZIP and answering from the Vector menu. Only 4.2.2 ever had been.
    0.1.7
    ⛔⛔ A HEADING MAY NOT ASSERT WHAT THE ROWS UNDER IT DENY, AND THIS ONE DID. Screening
    Belfast's street-tree register — 37,557 real features with no coordinates — the panel printed
    "LISTED UNDER A LAW IN FORCE HERE" above rows every one of which was marked
    "[not established]", under a sentence from the service saying it could not establish whether
    the instrument reaches those records. 0.1.4 called that section "LISTED", which claimed
    nothing; making it specific in 0.1.5 made it a claim the rows refuse. The heading now follows
    its rows, in three forms, and a bar holds it to them.
    ⛔⛔ A FILTER ON THE LAYER WAS INVISIBLE. QGIS honours a subset string in `getFeatures()`,
    so a filtered layer was screened in part and the answer read as though it covered the file.
    Worse on the empty path: the window blamed the FIELD — "choose the field that holds one
    scientific name" — for a layer whose field was right and whose rows a filter was hiding. The
    filter is now named, on both paths, with the count this run actually read.
    ⛔ THE COLUMN GUESS RECOMMENDED IDENTIFIERS. Swept across all 730 layers of our corpus, seven
    of 120 recommendations pointed at an id: `TaxonID` on four (the hint `taxon` cannot tell an
    identifier from a name) and `taxonid_left`, holding 100/130/150, on two more. An identifier is
    now rejected on its NAME, and a column of numbers on its VALUES — two rules, because neither
    covers the other. On those last two layers the guess now finds `taxon_name_left` instead.
    ⚠ And the check that reads a column now runs only after the free one that reads its name:
    a layer of thirty columns and no name among them was opening all thirty. The corpus sweep
    went from 1,686 s of CPU, unfinished, to 52 s.
    ★ Screening the same layer twice is correct — the cells are replaced, no seventh column
    appears, the date moves — and is now barred, which it never was.
    0.1.6
    ⛔ A SENTENCE ON THIS PAGE WAS FALSE, AND THIS PAGE IS PUBLISHED VERBATIM. It read
    "Coverage is Canada plus the global conventions; a layer outside Canada gets the conventions
    and the Red List only" — measured against the live service, a layer in the United Kingdom
    comes back with a law named and `pd_applies: yes`. The replacement names no scope at all:
    every screening already ends with the registers it was checked against and the jurisdictions
    it could not reach, and a coverage claim written once beside the product is exactly what went
    stale in "Ten laws" and "thirteen registers".
    ⛔ AND THE SELFTEST'S USAGE EXAMPLE NAMED A PRIVATE CHECKOUT AND A USERNAME. `qgis_selftest.py`
    ships inside this zip; its first lines were one machine's command line. Portable now, and the
    publishing tool refuses a file carrying either.
    0.1.5
    ⛔⛔ IT COULD NOT BE ENABLED ON QGIS 4 AT ALL, AND THE SUITE COULD NOT SEE IT. QGIS gates
    a plugin on `qgisMaximumVersion`, and an ABSENT one is not "no ceiling" — it is the minimum's
    major version plus .99. `qgisMinimumVersion=3.22` therefore declared a ceiling of 3.99, so a
    real QGIS 4 desktop skipped the plugin and wrote `passage_species_status=false` into its own
    profile. Everything on this page had been run on QGIS 4.2.2 through PyQGIS, which imports the
    code and never consults the plugin registry; installing the zip into a real profile and
    opening the menu is what found it, on the first try.
    ⛔⛔ THE FIFTH TIME, AND THIS TIME THE RULE ITSELF MOVED. A law, a convention and an
    assessment are three things, and telling them apart had been written out BY HAND in two
    places: the attribute columns, fixed in 0.1.4, and the on-screen panel, which was not. On a
    layer outside Canada the panel printed "The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species — Endangered
    [law in force here]" under a heading that read LISTED — three lines below the service's own
    headline, "no law we hold applies to them". Both callers now read one sorter; a sixth copy
    cannot drift, because there is nowhere left to write one.
    ★★ AND THE PANEL NO LONGER LOSES THE FINDING WHILE WITHHOLDING THE CLAIM: a taxon named
    only by a convention, by another jurisdiction's Act or by an assessment gets its own section,
    with the kind on every line, instead of being promoted to LISTED or dropped into the clean
    list.
    ⛔⛔ `pd_applies` HAD ONE BLANK CELL FOR FOUR DIFFERENT FINDINGS. A taxon screened and
    cleared, a name the GBIF backbone never matched, a place we hold no register for, and a name
    the service never reached all read as an empty cell in the column a consultant filters on.
    They now read "no", "not checked (…)", "not covered (no register we hold reaches …)" and
    "not checked (the screening budget ran out…)". Silence about a place is about us, and it
    says so in the cell rather than only in the panel.
    ⛔⛔ THE COLUMN GUESS MISSED EVERY REAL LAYER WE HOLD, and on one of them it landed on the
    common-name column — the one column the service refuses. It compared case-SENSITIVELY against
    a list holding `SCIENTIFIC` and `NOM_LATIN`, while real files carry `scientific`, `NOM_SCIEN`
    and `BOTANICAL_`. It is case-folded now, knows the spellings those files actually use, and
    when a layer splits the binomial across a genus column and a species column it says so and
    names the field-calculator expression instead of screening an epithet as a name.
    ⛔⛔ A FEATURE WITH AN EMPTY NAME CELL VANISHED WITHOUT A WORD. The ACT tree register fills
    `BOTANICAL_` on 7 of 298 rows; the panel said "5 distinct names read from 7 features" and
    nothing at all about the other 291. It now names them, in the first three lines.
    0.1.4
    ⛔ FIXED, AND IT AFFECTED EVERY LAYER OUTSIDE CANADA: the IUCN Red List could appear in the
    pd_law column and answer pd_applies with "yes". A law, a convention and an assessment are
    three different things, and the test that told them apart only ran when the service said a
    register did NOT apply. Outside Canada the conventions and the Red List are the only
    instruments that reach, so that is exactly where they were marked as applying and exactly
    where they were written down as law. They are reported in pd_other now, and a layer with no
    law reaching it leaves pd_law and pd_applies empty — no claim — instead of claiming one.
    0.1.3
    RUN ON THREE QGIS VERSIONS, AND THE FLOOR IS NOW THE LOWEST ONE THAT PASSED.
    qgisMinimumVersion is 3.22 because the whole suite — 67 bars, live against the service —
    runs green on QGIS 3.22.9 / Qt 5.15.2 / PyQt 5.15.4 / Python 3.9.5 / GDAL 3.5.1, on
    3.44.14 / PyQt 5.15.13, and on 4.2.2 / PyQt 6.11. It said 3.22 for two releases with
    nothing below 4.0 ever run; 0.1.2 raised it to 3.44 because 3.44 was all that had been
    measured. This lowers it back to 3.22 on a measurement rather than on a hope.
    ⛔ THE SHAPEFILE WRITE-BACK IS WHY THE OLDEST RUN MATTERED. Those six column names have to
    survive dBASE's 10-character cap, and the cap is GDAL's, not QGIS's — 3.22 ships GDAL 3.5.1
    against 4.2.2's 3.13.3, eight minor versions apart. A real shapefile and a real GeoPackage
    from disk gain all six columns under both, read back by a second layer opened on the bytes.
    0.1.2
    THE FIRST RELEASE RUN ON QGIS 3. Everything before this was graded on QGIS 4 / PyQt6 only,
    and 3.x was a claim: metadata said 3.22 and nothing had ever been run below 4.0. The whole
    suite now runs green on QGIS 3.44.14 / PyQt 5.15.13 AND on 4.2.2 / PyQt 6.11, 33 bars each.
    ⛔ qgisMinimumVersion is now 3.44 because 3.44 is what was RUN. It was 3.22, which nothing
    had measured. Nothing in this plugin needs an API newer than 3.22, so a lower floor is very
    likely fine — but "very likely" is not a number, and the version a plugin manager enforces
    should not be one. Install an older LTR beside this one, run qgis_selftest.py there, and
    lower the floor to whatever passes.
    ⛔ FIXED, AND IT AFFECTED EVERY QGIS 3 USER: a feature whose name field was empty sent the
    literal string "NULL" to the screening service as a species name. Under PyQt5 an empty
    attribute is a null QVariant, not Python's None, and it stringifies to "NULL" — so a layer
    with one blank row put a binomial nobody wrote onto a screening table, and the service then
    refused the whole column. Read through qgis.core.NULL now, which is correct under both.
    ⛔ FIXED: a QUALIFIED listing was written into the attribute table as a settled one. SARA
    Schedule 1 names Rangifer tarandus caribou only under the Southern Mountain and Northern
    Mountain populations; screening Quebec's own Gaspesie caribou layer produced
    "pd_applies: yes" and a SARA status belonging to two other populations. pd_applies now reads
    "yes (qualified)" and pd_law names the populations the instrument actually listed.
    ⛔ FIXED: a layer with no geometry was never asked which province it is in. The test for that
    asked whether geometryType() was None, which it never is — a table reports GeometryType.Null,
    an enum member. The window now asks, and a placeless layer reads "not established", never "no".
    ⛔ FIXED: a layer whose provider cannot take new columns — a zipped shapefile, a CSV — now
    says so in a sentence instead of appearing to have been written.
    Instrument names and editions now reach the columns: the service was computing the register
    cards and not sending them, so pd_law read "ca_sara" and no edition was ever cited.
    0.1.1
    Fixes two PyQt6 breaks that stopped the window opening at all on QGIS 4: Qt.PlainText and
    QDialogButtonBox.Close do not exist there. Verified on QGIS 4.2.2 / PyQt 6.11; the scoped
    spellings used now resolve under PyQt5 too, but 3.x has not been run.
    A convention is named as a convention, not as another jurisdiction's Act.
    A cold 500 from the service is retried; a refusal is not.
    0.1.0
    First release. Screens a name field against ten laws and three assessment lists, writes six
    columns back, and reports the COSEWIC / Schedule 1 disagreements.
